# Migrating to 0.6.x from 0.5.x

This migration guide documents the breaking changes made in version 0.6.0 and provides detailed guidance on how to migrate from 0.5.x. It is primarily focused on end-user applications. While this guide covers most major changes, reading the documentation is highly recommended.

## Overview

Symphonia 0.6.0 introduces significant breaking changes to begin laying the groundwork to support video and subtitle tracks. While video and subtitle decoder support is gated by experimental feature flags in 0.6.0 (see the README), the restructuring of Symphonia to support these decoders is reflected everywhere.

In addition to the aforementioned restructuring, metadata and audio primitives have been completely rewritten for improved utility, ease-of-use, and safety. Various other quality-of-life enhancements have also been made.

## Crate

* The minimum supported Rust version is now 1.85 (Rust 2024 edition).
* Metadata format support is now controllable through feature flags like format readers and decoders. The `all-meta` feature is enabled by default. For fine-grained control, the: `ape`, `id3v1`, and `id3v2` feature flags can be used individually. It is recommended that `all-meta` be enabled even if using `default-features = false` to improve probe detection.
* SIMD optimization, `opt-simd`, is now enabled by default.

## Formats

### Format Options

* `FormatOptions::enable_gapless` has been removed. All timing information and frame counts will be returned as written in the container. Generally this excludes frames that will be discarded by the decoder.

### Format Reader

* `FormatReader::next_packet()` returns `Ok(None)` when the end of the media is reached. An end-of-file error is now always unexpected and signals an error.
* `FormatId` and `FormatInfo` have been introduced to identify and provide information about the media format being read by the reader. Use `FormatReader::format_info()` to obtain this information.
* Cues (`FormatReader::cues()`) have been replaced by chapters (`FormatReader::chapters()`). Chapters support an unbounded recursive hierarchical structure that is a superset of the functionality provided by cues.
* Attachments (`FormatReader::attachments()`) support has been added. Vendor data that was previously made available in the metadata has been moved to the attachments.
* Getting the default track now requires specifying a track type (i.e., audio, video, etc.). Additional helpers for getting the first track of a particular type have also been added.

### Track

* Timing information that was previously stored in `CodecParameters` (`time_base`, `n_frames`, `start_ts`, `padding`, `delay`) are now stored directly in `Track`.
* `Track` adds a new timing field: `duration`. While number of frames could also be considered a duration in time-base units, this is incorrect and only valid when the time-base is `1 / sample_rate`. While this is typical for types of audio files, it is not always the case, particularly for MKV files. The number of frames should be considered a unit-less count of decoded frames. For human readable duration, `duration` should be used instead.
* The duration and number of frames excludes any frames, and their cumulative duration, that will be discarded by a decoder if gapless playback is enabled.
* `Track::codec_params` is now optional. It may be `None` if the track is of an unknown type.

### Packet

* `Packet::ts`, the packet's timestamp, is replaced with `Packet::pts` and `Packet::dts` for the presentation and decode timestamps, respectively. For audio tracks, these timestamps are equal. However, end-user applications should generally use the presentation timestamp.
* `Packet::pts` and `Packet::dts` are now of type `Timestamp` which is a new-type wrapper of an `i64`. See the Units section for more details about `Timestamp`.
* `Packet::dur`, `Packet::trim_start`, and `Packet::trim_end` are now of type `Duration` which is a new-type wrapper of an `u64`. See the Units section for more details about `Duration`.
* A negative presentation timestamp indicates the packet contains delay frames that will be discarded by a decoder if the decoder has gapless playback enabled.
* The duration of a packet excludes frames that will be discarded by a decoder. `Packet::block_dur()` can be used to obtain the duration of all frames within the packet.
* `Packet`s must now be created with a `PacketBuilder`.

### Probe

* The `symphonia::core::probe` module has been moved to be a sub-module of `symphonia::core::formats`.
* `Probe` has been rewritten. The following changes are notable for applications: 
  - `Probe::format` has been renamed to `Probe::probe()` and only returns a `Box<dyn FormatReader>` now. Any additional metadata that was found and read while probing is made available on the format reader.
  - Format or metdata readers may be registered in one of three tiers: preferred, standard, or fallback. If there are multiple readers registered for the same format, then the one with the most-preferred tier will be chosen. Symphonia registers its first-party readers at the standard tier. If an applications wants to override Symphonia's first-party reader, it should register its own reader at the preferred tier. Similarly, if an application prefers a first-party reader over its own, it should register their own reader at the fallback tier.
* `QueryDescriptor` was removed. A format or metadata reader that supports probing must instead implement `ProbeableFormat` or `ProbeableMetadata`, respectively.
* The `QueryDescriptor::score()` function has been moved to the `Scoreable` trait and must also be implemented for a reader to be probeable.

## Metadata

* `MetadataRevision` has been rewritten to separate per-track metadata and metadata that is relevant to the entire media. These are made available through the `MetadataRevision::per_track` vector and `MetadataRevision::media`, respectively. Tags and visuals are now contained in a `MetadataContainer`.
* `MetadataId` and `MetadataInfo` have been introduced to identify and provide information the metadata format the metadata revision originated from. This information is accessible through the `MetadataRevision::info` field.
* A `Tag` is now a composition of a `RawTag` and an optional `StandardTag`. `StandardTagKeys`s have been removed.
  - A `StandardTag` is a parsed representation of a tag. Unlike a `RawTag`, a standard tag has a well-defined data type and meaning (e.g., `StandardTag::TrackNumber` contains an `u64` value indicating the track number).
  - A `RawTag` stores the tag in a data format that matches as closely as possible to the data format that the tag was written. It is a composition of a name, value, and an optional set of sub-fields which are also name-value pairs. The names of the sub-fields are dependent on the metadata format. Constants for these names can be found in the `symphonia_metadata` crate for each metadata format.

## Codecs

* There are now codec type sub-modules for audio, video, and subtitle codecs. Consequently, much of the contents of `symphonia::core::codecs` have been moved into an `audio` sub-module and the types and traits within prefixed with `Audio` (e.g., the `Decoder` trait is now `AudioDecoder`).
* Each codec type has a different `CodecId` type (e.g., `AudioCodecId`, `VideoCodecId`, etc.).
* Each codec type sub-module now contains a `well_known` sub-module for well-known codec ID constants. A nested `profiles` sub-module contains well-known codec profile constants.
* `CodecParameters` is now an enumeration of type-specific codec parameters (e.g., `AudioCodecParameters`, `VideoCodecParameters`, etc.).

### Audio

* `AudioDecoderOptions::gapless` has been added to enable or disable gapless playback. It is enabled by default.

### Registry

* `CodecRegistry::register()` has been removed with no replacement.
* `CodecRegistry::make()` and `CodecRegistry::register_all()` functions have been replaced with the family of `make_*_decoder()` and `register_*_decoder()` functions, where `*` is `audio`, `video`, or `subtitle`.
* Decoders may be registered in one of three tiers: preferred, standard, or fallback. If there are multiple decoders registered for the same codec, then the one with the most-preferred tier will be chosen. Symphonia registers its first-party decoders at the standard tier. If an applications wants to override Symphonia's first-party decoder, it should register its own decoder at the preferred tier. Similarly, if an application prefers a first-party decoder over its own, it should register their own decoder at the fallback tier.

## Audio Primitives

* The `symphonia::core::audio` module has been fully redesigned.
* `AudioSpec` replaces `SignalSpec`.
* `Channels` is no longer a bitmask of channel positions, instead it is an enumeration of many ways a set of channels could be represented:
  - A bitmask of channel positions.
  - A discrete channel count.
  - An Ambisonic channel set defined by the Ambisonic order.
  - A list of channel labels. A channel label may identify a positioned channel, a discrete channel by index, an Ambisonic channel number, or an Ambisonic B-format channel component.
* Four traits define the methods to access and manipulate audio data. These traits replace the `Signal` trait.
  - The `Audio` trait is the primary trait for immutably accessing audio data. Along with providing basic information such as the number of planes and frames, this trait implements:
    - Iteration of, and access to, individual audio planes.
    - Type-safe access to audio samples.
    - Slicing.
    - Copying audio samples to vectors or user-provided slices in interleaved or planar format with sample format conversion.
  - The `AudioMut` trait is the mutable complement to `Audio`.
  - The `AudioBytes` trait provides methods to copy the audio in interleaved or planar format, with sample format conversion, as bytes.
  - The `AudioBufferBytes` trait provides functions to obtain the maximum capacity of an `AudioBuffer` in bytes.
* `AudioBuffer` implements these four traits. Likewise, since an `AudioBuffer` is now sliceable using `AudioBuffer::slice()`, an `AudioSlice` also implements both the `Audio` and `AudioBytes` traits.
* `AudioBufferRef` has been replaced by `GenericAudioBufferRef`. It is no longer copy-on-write.
* `GenericAudioBufferRef` implements a subset of the functionality of `Audio`, `AudioBytes`, and `AudioBufferBytes` so matching is not required for many operations.
* `SampleBuffer` and `RawSampleBuffer` have been removed. Use the copy functions on the aforementioned audio traits or `GenericAudioBufferRef` instead.
* `Layout` has been removed. Instead, the `layouts` sub-module defines `Channels` constants for many standard audio channel layouts.

## Units

* `Duration` is a new-type wrapper of `u64`. It enforces checked or saturating arithmetic to force overflow handling, and provides convenience functions for operations with `Timestamp`.
* `Timestamp` is a new-type wrapper of `i64`. It enforces checked arithmetic and `Duration`. It enforces checked or saturating arithmetic to force overflow handling, and provides convenience functions for operations with `Duration`.
* `TimeBase` is now a composition of `NonZero<u32>` for both the numerator and denominator.
* `Time` is now implemented as an `i64` count of seconds, and `u32` count of nanoseconds.

## Other

* `MediaSourceStream` and `MediaSource` now have an explicit lifetime. This allows the use of borrowed data sources instead of forcing a `'static` lifetime.
* Many structures and enumerations have been marked as `#[non_exhaustive]` in anticipation for future additions.
